Runaway stars.
This story all begins in the
constellation of Orion. Perhaps my
favorite constellation in the night sky
made of many bright stars. Very easy to
recognize, especially with the diagonal
line of Orion's belt across the middle
there. And of course, we have Bett and
Riel, the two most prominent and
well-known stars at the outer diagonal
corners.
Plus in the center, ringed in red, there
we have M42, the great Orion Nebula, the
most famous and easiest to see of the
deep sky objects. A nebula, a cloud of
gas and dust that has been collapsing
for a few million years and forming new
stars and new generations of solar
systems deep within the nebula.
Some of those stars are very powerful
hot blue white stars that are pouring
out radiation and blowing a huge bubble
in the center of the nebula. Now you can
see the very bright central region where
there's a group called the trapezium of
four very powerful stars and the energy
from those the lots of ultraviolet light
and high energy photons pouring out is
lighting up and ionizing some of the
hydrogen causing it to glow with that
characteristic red color. And then we
also have the darker dusty regions of
colder material
that failed to collapse into stars and
probably won't now. It'll probably be
blown away because we have about 3,000
stars that have been formed within the
nebula. And the combined light and heat
output from those will blow the g d d d
d d d d d d d d d d d d d d d d dust
away, what's left of it, and it will
perhaps condense and cool somewhere else
in a future star forming uh episode.
But we're not going to look directly at
the nebula. That's for another video.
We'll be looking at that. But we're
going to go just next to it. Over here
where the red ring is, we have NGC1980,
the lost jewel of Orion, an open
cluster. So, a previous burst of star
formation occurred and created a group
of new stars here that were discovered
by that man again, William Hershel, in
1786. He did the new general catalog,
hence the NGC. And this was number 1980
in that list. We think it's about 4.7
million years old for most of the stars
that are in this grouping.
And the really bright one that's showing
with the uh square defraction spikes on
it there, that is Iota Orionis. And this
is really where we're going to start our
story of runaway stars. It's a multiple
star system about 1,300 light years
away, 1340 to be precise. And we can see
that there are three visible components
and one more that's been detected only
via its spectrum when stars get so close
together in very tight orbits. Sometimes
we can't see them as two separate
objects. But when we look at the light
by splitting it up into all its colors,
we can see the emission and absorption
lines from different elements and
molecules in the stars atmosphere. And
sometimes you can see that there are two
sets of lines shifted of course because
the stars are in orbit around each other
quite rapidly. And the Doppler effect
affects the um color of the light as we
see it. It shifts it towards the red if
they're moving away from us, towards the
blue if they're moving towards us. And
so we can see the fingerprint of the
chemical elements as two different sets
of lines. And that's a shorefire clue
that we have two stars.
And so if we have a look more closely at
Iota Orioness, we find a a bit of a
mystery, the age mystery.
The main brightest star A is a a
whopper. It's 23 times the mass of the
sun. An Oclass very hot blue super
giant. And age-wise somewhere in the
region of four to five million years
old.
The companion that's orbiting around it
is smaller but still very large. 13
solar masses. And this one curiously
gives us an age of 9 million years,
which is double that of its companion.
And these two are orbiting fairly
closely
around each other around their common
center of mass. The B star, well, that's
a little bit further away, smaller
again, five solar masses and aged at
around 3 million years. So that doesn't
seem quite right. We have these three
different ages for three stars that
appear to be in one star system. So how
did that happen? Surely they if they're
in such tight orbits around each other,
particularly the A star and its
companion, we should get the same age,
but these are different by a factor of
two. 4 and a half million and 9 million.
Well, that difference in age is telling
us that they didn't form together at the
same time. Uh they formed independently,
4 and a half million years apart and
have only come together later. And the
highly elliptical nature of their
month-long orbit around each other
suggests this very strongly. This is a
capture event where the two stars have
formed separately and ended up in orbit
around each other. Now, it's quite
difficult to just capture something with
gravity. If it falls in towards you, it
will pick up speed as it goes down the
gravity slope,
gaining kinetic energy by losing
potential energy. And then it will, if
it doesn't hit you, it will whiz past
and climb back out of the gravity well
and move on in a different direction,
but it won't fall back.
In order to go into orbit, it has to be
able to dump some of its incoming energy
and incoming momentum. Without losing
some of each of those, it will just go
on its merry way having been deflected.
So, this tends to require an existing
multiple star system. So in this
example, we have stars A and B orbiting
around each other and a rapidly moving
third star formed independently
somewhere else. C comes in towards the
system and the gravity of this threebody
arrangement. Each star pulls on the
other two,
disrupts the orbit of A and B. And the
result in this particular configuration
is that C loses momentum and energy and
A picks up momentum and energy and A
gets hurled out of the system and B and
C end up as an orbiting pair. And so we
think this is probably what's happened
with Iota Orionis um that the two
components were formed independently and
went through one of these sort of
multiple star system capture events.
Now
when we look around the sky we can find
a number of other interesting stars.
AE Orga the bright star in this lovely
photograph set against the background of
all that pink and purple nebulosity
there. This is located in the
constellation of Orrigo the chariot here
which has that bright star Capella at
its uh northern end there. But down
below we've got the three open clusters
Messier 36, 37 and 38. Great objects to
chase down with binoculars. And then
just to the right of them, ringed in
red, AE or RIA, a blue O type massive
star, very hot, visible to us, 1300
light years away as magnitude six, just
visible with the naked eye under really
good conditions, but you'll track it
down with binoculars or a small
telescope quite easily. And when we have
looked at this star, we've seen that it
is changing its position. It has a high
proper motion as we look from one year
to another and over the decades. The
position is changing at quite a high
speed. Not something we would normally
associate with a star at this distance.
That's something we usually find with
the nearby stars like Alpha Centuri or
Barnard star that are only a few light
years away. At 1300 light years, the
fact we can see the proper motion tells
us it's moving very rapidly. And in
fact, that's been measured at 57
kilometers per second.
To put that in context, the orbital
velocity of the Earth around the Sun is
18. So this is very fast indeed. And
we can age this star and we get a figure
of around 4 million years.
I said it was visible against the
background of the nebula, the flaming
star nebula. Well worth looking at if
you get the chance. But this is not
where it was born. That very rapid speed
is the star entering the nebula from um
a different birthplace. This cloud of
gas is just in its way. It's not where
it was born. It was born somewhere else.
And this highresolution photograph of AE
orga in the overlay here shows the bow
shock. You can see the red arc down
there at the bottom just below the
bright yellow of the star. And that is
the gas
turning into a shock wave due to this
high-speed passage of AE or
now if we look down into a constellation
of Colombia below uh Orion further south
below from my point of view here in
Cambridge then we find another
powerhouse of a star another Oclass blue
giant star class 09.5
18 solar masses and this is at 1,900
light years away from the earth and also
shows very high proper motion. It's
moving even faster. It's doing from our
point of view the transverse velocity
across our line of sight of over 100
kilometers/s.
And this too is around 4 million years
old. Well, what's remarkable about that?
Well, the remarkable thing is that given
that we know the speed that it's moving
and the direction that it's moving in,
we can trace back the path of New Coli
and of AE or
what this tells us is they're moving
away from each other at over 200
kilometers/s,
but that you can track back that
velocity back to the common point of
origin. in intersecting with where we
find Iota Orioness
and both tracks work out to be such that
they've been traveling for 2.5 million
years. So what this is telling us is
that 2 and a half million years ago both
of these runaway stars Ae orga and new
coli were hurled out of the Iota
Orionist system.
And these two have both got ages of 4
million years, which is roughly the same
as the main star of Iota.
And so it looks like an incoming star
came into a triple star system
of Iota Orionis as was
the star got captured and in the process
disrupted the multiple star system with
these two runaway stars being hurled out
in opposite directions across the
galaxy. And of course the opposite
direction is a way of canceling out that
uh net momentum. So it all makes perfect
sense.
But if we look also in to the night sky,
we find the star 53 Aratus,
53rd star in the constellation of Aries,
around a thousand light years away.
Another powerful star, not quite as big
as a Origa or New Coli. This one's only
seven and a half times the mass of a sun
and is blue white B type star.
It's also moving and moving relative to
the Orion Nebula at 48 km/s.
And if we trace this back, you would be
expecting me to say at this point it
points to IoT Orionus. Well, it
certainly points back to the Orion
Nebula, but it's taken a bit longer,
four to five million years, for this one
to have moved from the Orion Nebula to
where it is now. Running the distance
and the velocity backwards, we can work
that out. And what this is telling us is
that this one was ejected from the Orion
Nebula in a different event,
becoming a runaway star.
And what we think happened was that 53
Aratus
was a multiple star system in the Orion
Nebula, but its stellar companion was a
more massive star and reached the end of
its life and exploded as a supernova.
And as a consequence of the disruption
of its larger companion, 53 Aratus was
hurled out across space at 48 km/s.
its orbital momentum translating into it
basically flying off in a straight line
once there was nothing left for it to
orbit around. it would have punched out
through the cloud of the expanding
supernova and just carried on in its uh
original direction to a large extent.
And we think that the Barnard's loop,
that great curving loop that you see in
the photograph on the right arcing
around the whole area of uh Orion, might
well be the resulting supernova
shell expanding away. the the supernova
remnant and this could well be Barnard's
loop. So, it's showing that the Orion
Nebula and that star forming region is
hurling out these runaway stars across
space um and has done so at least twice
and probably many times. So, these
things don't just produce a star cluster
that stays local. They actually scatter
stars all around the galaxy in the
process due to these collisional capture
events. And I think that's very
fascinating indeed.
There's much much more to say about the
Orion Nebula and I will promise to cover
that in a future episode. But for now,
thanks very much for listening and I
hope you get the chance to click on
like, leave me some comments, subscribe.
You know what to do. I don't need to
tell you.